<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 5: Astraea Redux Without Cash</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="volume-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="book-1-2" epub:type="division">
				<section id="chapter-1-2-5" epub:type="chapter">
					<h3>
						<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>
						<span epub:type="subtitle">Astraea Redux Without Cash</span>
					</h3>
					<p>Observe, however, beyond the Atlantic, has not the new day verily dawned! Democracy, as we said, is born; storm-girt, is struggling for life and victory. A sympathetic France rejoices over the Rights of Man; in all saloons, it is said, What a spectacle! Now too behold our Deane, our Franklin, American plenipotentiaries, here in position soliciting;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-35" id="noteref-35" epub:type="noteref">35</a> the sons of the Saxon Puritans, with their Old-Saxon temper, Old-Hebrew culture, sleek Silas, sleek Benjamin, here on such errand, among the light children of Heathenism, Monarchy, Sentimentalism, and the Scarlet-woman. A spectacle indeed; over which saloons may cackle joyous; though Kaiser Joseph, questioned on it, gave this answer, most unexpected from a philosophe: “Madame, the trade I live by is that of royalist (<i xml:lang="fr">Mon métier à moi c’est d’être royaliste</i>).”</p>
					<p>So thinks light Maurepas too; but the wind of philosophism and force of public opinion will blow him round. Best wishes, meanwhile, are sent; clandestine privateers armed. Paul Jones shall equip his <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Bon Homme Richard</i>: weapons, military stores can be smuggled over (if the English do not seize them); wherein, once more Beaumarchais, dimly as the giant smuggler becomes visible⁠—filling his own lank pocket withal. But surely, in any case, France should have a navy. For which great object were not now the time: now when that proud Termagant of the seas has her hands full? It is true, an impoverished treasury cannot build ships; but the hint once given (which Beaumarchais says he gave), this and the other loyal seaport, Chamber of Commerce, will build and offer them. Goodly vessels bound into the waters; a <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ville de Paris</i>, leviathan of ships.</p>
					<p>And now when gratuitous three-deckers dance there at anchor, with streamers flying; and eleutheromaniac philosophedom grows ever more clamorous, what can a Maurepas do⁠—but gyrate? Squadrons cross the ocean: Gages, Lees, rough Yankee generals, “with woollen nightcaps under their hats,” present arms to the far-glancing Chivalry of France; and newborn democracy sees, not without amazement, “Despotism tempered by epigrams” fight at her side. So, however, it is. King’s forces and heroic volunteers; Rochambeaus, Bouillés, Lameths, Lafayettes, have drawn their swords in this sacred quarrel of mankind;⁠—shall draw them again elsewhere, in the strangest way.</p>
					<hr/>
					<p>Off Ushant some naval thunder is heard. In the course of which did our young prince, Duke de Chartres, “hide in the hold”; or did he materially, by <em>active</em> heroism, contribute to the victory? Alas, by a second edition, we learn that there was no victory; or that English Keppel had it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-36" id="noteref-36" epub:type="noteref">36</a> Our poor young prince gets his opera plaudits changed into mocking tehees; and cannot become Grand-Admiral⁠—the source to him of woes which one may call endless.</p>
					<p>Woe also for <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Ville de Paris</i>, the leviathan of ships! English Rodney has clutched it, and led it home, with the rest; so successful was his new “manoeuvre of breaking the enemy’s line.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-37" id="noteref-37" epub:type="noteref">37</a> It seems as if, according to Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span>, “France were never to have a navy.” Brave Suffren must return from Hyder Ally and the Indian Waters; with small result; yet with great glory for “six” <em>non-defeats</em>;⁠—which indeed, with such seconding as he had, one may reckon heroic. Let the old sea-hero rest now, honoured of France, in his native Cevennes mountains; send smoke, not of gunpowder, but mere culinary smoke, through the old chimneys of the Castle of Jalès⁠—which one day, in other hands, shall have other fame. Brave Lapérouse shall by and by lift anchor, on philanthropic voyage of discovery; for the King knows geography.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-38" id="noteref-38" epub:type="noteref">38</a> But, alas, this also will not prosper: the brave navigator goes, and returns not; the seekers search far seas for him in vain. He has vanished trackless into blue immensity; and only some mournful mysterious shadow of him hovers long in all heads and hearts.</p>
					<p>Neither, while the war yet lasts, will Gibraltar surrender. Not though Crillon, Nassau-Siegen, with the ablest projectors extant, are there; and Prince Condé and Prince d’Artois have hastened to help. Wondrous leather-roofed Floating-batteries, set afloat by French-Spanish <i xml:lang="fr">Pacte de Famille</i>, give gallant summons: to which, nevertheless, Gibraltar answers Plutonically, with mere torrents of redhot iron⁠—as if stone Calpe had become a throat of the Pit; and utters such a Doom’s-blast of a no, as all men must credit.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-39" id="noteref-39" epub:type="noteref">39</a></p>
					<p>And so, with this loud explosion, the noise of war has ceased; an Age of Benevolence may hope, forever. Our noble volunteers of freedom have returned, to be her missionaries. Lafayette, as the matchless of his time, glitters in the Versailles Oeil-de-Beouf; has his bust set up in the Paris Hôtel-de-Ville. Democracy stands inexpugnable, immeasurable, in her New World; has even a foot lifted towards the Old;⁠—and our French finances, little strengthened by such work, are in no healthy way.</p>
					<p>What to do with the finance? This indeed is the great question: a small but most black weather-symptom, which no radiance of universal hope can cover. We saw Turgot cast forth from the Controllership, with shrieks⁠—for want of a Fortunatus’ purse. As little could M. de Clugny manage the duty; or indeed do anything, but consume his wages; attain “a place in history,” where as an ineffectual shadow thou beholdest him still lingering;⁠—and let the duty manage itself. Did Genevese Necker <em>possess</em> such a purse, then? He possessed banker’s skill, banker’s honesty; <em>credit</em> of all kinds, for he had written academic prize essays, struggled for India companies, given dinners to philosophes, and “realised a fortune in twenty years.” He possessed, further, a taciturnity and solemnity; of depth, or else of dullness. How singular for Celadon Gibbon, false swain as he had proved; whose father, keeping most probably his own gig, “would not hear of such a union,”⁠—to find now his forsaken Demoiselle Curchod sitting in the high places of the world, as Minister’s Madame, and “Necker not jealous!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-40" id="noteref-40" epub:type="noteref">40</a></p>
					<p>A new young Demoiselle, one day to be famed as a Madame and De Staël, was romping about the knees of the Decline and Fall: the lady Necker founds Hospitals; gives solemn Philosophe dinner-parties, to cheer her exhausted Controller-General. Strange things have happened: by clamour of Philosophism, management of Marquis de Pezay, and poverty constraining even kings. And so Necker, Atlas-like, sustains the burden of the finances, for five years long?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-41" id="noteref-41" epub:type="noteref">41</a> Without wages, for he refused such; cheered only by public opinion, and the ministering of his noble wife. With many thoughts in him, it is hoped;⁠—which, however, he is shy of uttering. His <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Compte Rendu</i>, published by the royal permission, fresh sign of a new era, shows wonders;⁠—which what but the genius of some Atlas-Necker can prevent from becoming portents? In Necker’s head too there is a whole pacific French Revolution, of its kind; and in that taciturn dull depth, or deep dullness, ambition enough.</p>
					<p>Meanwhile, alas, his Fotunatus’ purse turns out to be little other than the old “<i xml:lang="la">vectigal</i> of parsimony.” Nay, he too has to produce his scheme of taxing: clergy, noblesse to be taxed; provincial Assemblies, and the rest⁠—like a mere Turgot! The expiring M. de Maurepas must gyrate one other time. Let Necker also depart; not unlamented.</p>
					<p>Great in a private station, Necker looks on from the distance; abiding his time. “Eighty thousand copies” of his new book, which he calls <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Administration des Finances</i>, will be sold in few days. He is gone; but shall return, and that more than once, borne by a whole shouting nation. Singular Controller-General of the finances; once clerk in Thelusson’s bank!</p>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
